---
layout: post
title: MBTA Maps
---

## {{ page.title }}

**Update:** I haven't worked on this in many moons and it has ceased to work.
[Here is a currently working MBTA map](http://www.thrall.net/maps/mbta.html).

Following on the heels of [Adrian Holovaty](http://www.holovaty.com/)'s work
with [Chicago Transit
Authority](http://www.holovaty.com/blog/archive/2005/04/19/0216) maps, I dug
around on the [MBTA](http://www.mbta.com/)'s website (Boston's T) for some
decent [maps](http://www.mbta.com/traveling_t/schedules_pdfmaps_system.asp).
These are very clean and to-scale, so they were ripe for a Boston version.

After some fiddling around, I discovered that the Cambridge / Somerville inset appears to correspond with Google's tiles when the PDF is imported into Photoshop with a width of 1710px.  After some slicing and dicing, I give you:

<a href="http://maps.mojodna.net/mbta/mbta.png"><img src="http://maps.mojodna.net/mbta/mbta-thumb.png" border="0" alt="MBTA on Google Maps" /></a>

This is a screenshot of [the Greasemonkey
version](http://maps.mojodna.net/mbta/mbta_google_maps.user.js) (with
**minor** alterations to Adrian's).

Building on top of some experimentation I'd done last week with [Google Maps
stand-alone](http://stuff.rancidbacon.com/gmaps-standalone/), I made a
non-Greasemonkey version by adding in a hook that effectively runs the
Greasemonkey script. The default zoom-level is wrong, and my quick and dirty
tile-serving code uses redirects (slowing things down and not handling missing
tiles gracefully), so I'll post that later once I get a chance to clean it up.

**Update:** I don't have enough time to keep going on my own, so I've [posted
my work and a basic knowledge
dump](http://mojodna.net/2005/04/20/continuing-to-map-the-mbta/).

**Update:** Ok, so I found a bit more time and added `zoom=1` and `zoom=3`
(the latter with the bigger map, thus covering the suburbs, though the North
Shore is a bit off). Adding additional zoom levels (`zoom=4`, `zoom=5`?) is
probably worthwhile to get more of an overview. Beyond that, what's next is
probably merging maps together to increase the coverage area and using the
insets for additional zoom levels.
